[LOG-1815] Enhancement proposal: Add alerts and rules for operator-managed LokiStack (#940)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/cluster-logging/loki-observability.md

approvers:
creation-date: 2021-10-21
last-updated: 2021-10-21
status: []
see-also: []
replaces: []
superseded-by: []
---

# LokiStack Observability

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

This enhancement adds observability capabilities to Loki operator in the form of Prometheus rules and alerts.
These rules and alerts are used to identify abnormal conditions and update operators.

## Motivation

### Goals

* List the alerts and rules that could identify abnormal conditions.

### Non-Goals

## Proposal

### User Stories

### Implementation Details

The operational alerts are used to send alerts from Loki deployment indicating some level of unhealthy or misbehavior of
the Loki Deployment. The alerts are based on metrics consumed from Prometheus into alert manager, evaluated and when 
fired, pushed to notify human operators.

> Loki Alerts can be categorized as follows:

Author: Done

> * **Loki System**: One or more of the Loki components is misbehaving; this can be due to any of Loki or OCP system that is not working as expected

Author: I installed `loki-operator` and checked the labels of `loki_panic_total` metric. It seems that we can distinguish between loki components using the `job` label
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/37826670/139858340-3fb7f09f-e4f7-445b-a534-74635d6e0bfe.png)

* **Tenant workload**: Customer (tenant) sending (writing) workload or (reading) query logs and/or acting against the system in some anomalous behavior
* **Storage**: The storage system that Loki works with is not working as expected. This includes internal storage and external S3 storage

Loki alerts can be of various severities:
* **Critical**: Immediate attention is required Loki system is not working
* **Error**: System is in error mode resulting in data loss and or some of the components are not functioning
* **Warning**: No data loss, but attention is required. This might be both, information before error or some temporal warning
* **Info**: Information only alert

#### Alerts

Some alerts are based on metrics exposed by Loki and some on recording rules, which are metrics created based on other metrics.

See also [Defining recording rules](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/)

> ##### LokiRequestErrors

Author: Done

At least 10% of requests are responded by 5xx server errors.

Category: Loki System

Severity: critical

query:
```
100 * sum(rate(loki_request_duration_seconds_count{status_code=~"5.."}[1m])) by (namespace, job, route)
/
sum(rate(loki_request_duration_seconds_count[1m])) by (namespace, job, route)
> 10
```

References:
* https://monitoring.mixins.dev/loki/
* https://github.com/rhobs/configuration/blob/main/docs/sop/observatorium.md#lokirequesterrors

##### LokiRequestPanics

A panic was triggered.

Category: Loki System

Severity: critical

query:
```
sum(increase(loki_panic_total[10m])) by (namespace, job) > 0
```

Note: `loki_panic_total` metric is implemented but not documented.
* https://github.com/grafana/loki/blob/a046d7926122cef1b619d89bfcf15403e14e0de3/pkg/util/server/recovery.go#L19-L23
* https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/operations/observability/

References:
* https://monitoring.mixins.dev/loki/
* https://github.com/rhobs/configuration/blob/main/docs/sop/observatorium.md#lokirequestpanics

> ##### LokiRequestLatency

Author: All tenants I guess. I couldn't find a label that distinguishes between labels

> The 99th percentile is experiencing high latency.

Author: done

Category: Loki System

Severity: critical

query:
```
namespace_job_route:loki_request_duration_seconds:99quantile{route!~"(?i).*tail.*"} > 1
```

> underline recording rule:

Author: done

```
record: namespace_job_route:loki_request_duration_seconds:99quantile
expr: histogram_quantile(0.99, sum(rate(loki_request_duration_seconds_bucket[1m]))
  by (le, namespace, job, route))
```

References:
* https://monitoring.mixins.dev/loki/
* https://github.com/rhobs/configuration/blob/main/docs/sop/observatorium.md#lokirequestlatency

##### LokiTenantRateLimitWarning

A tenant is experiencing rate limiting.

Category: Tenant Workload

Severity: error

query:
```
sum by (namespace, tenant, reason) (sum_over_time(rate(loki_discarded_samples_total{namespace="observatorium-logs-production"}[1m])[30m:1m]))
> 100
```

Note: `loki_discarded_samples_total` metric is implemented but not documented
* https://github.com/grafana/loki/blob/25163470b0b861d5c539b66a4c5613e46666e0c8/pkg/validation/validate.go#L98-L105
* https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/operations/observability/

References:
* https://github.com/rhobs/configuration/blob/main/docs/sop/observatorium.md#lokitenantratelimitwarning

> 

Author: I added a summary table at the beginning and added a few more alerts

| **Info** | Info level alerts represent situations an administrator should be aware of, but that don't necessarily require any action. Use these sparingly, and consider instead reporting this information via Kubernetes events. |

See also: [Alerting Consistency](/enhancements/monitoring/alerting-consistency.md)
#### Alerts

Some alerts are based on metrics exposed by Loki and some on recording rules, which are metrics created based on other metrics.

See also [Defining recording rules](https://prometheus.io/docs/prometheus/latest/configuration/recording_rules/)

Alerts summary table:

| Alert | Category | Severity | Summary |
| ----- | -------- | -------- | ----------- |
| [LokiRequestErrors](#LokiRequestErrors) | Loki System | Critical | At least 10% of requests are responded by 5xx server errors |
| [LokiRequestPanics](#LokiRequestPanics) | Loki System | Critical | A panic was triggered |
| [LokiRequestLatency](#LokiRequestLatency) | Loki System | Critical | The 99th percentile is experiencing high latency (higher than 1 second) |
| [LokiTenantRateLimitWarning](#LokiTenantRateLimitWarning) | Tenant Workload | Warning | A tenant is experiencing rate limiting |

> | [LokiCPUHighWarning](#LokiCPUHighWarning) | Loki System | Warning | Loki's CPU usage is high (above 75% for 5 minutes) |
> | [LokiCPUHighError](#LokiCPUHighError) | Loki System | Critical | Loki's CPU usage is high (above 95% for 5 minutes) |

Reviewer: These can both be called LokiCPUHigh - you can issue the same alert with a different severity based on different rules. You only do that for different intensities of "the same condition", which is the case here.  [An example of this pattern](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/fd2cbc333d5a89c816db3f5dead99dec6d1e6a7f/assets/node-exporter/prometheus-rule.yaml#L17-L52)
```suggestion
| [LokiCPUHigh](#LokiCPUHigh) | Loki System | Warning | Loki's CPU usage is high (above 75% for 5 minutes) |
| [LokiCPUHigh](#LokiCPUHigh) | Loki System | Critical | Loki's CPU usage is high (above 95% for 5 minutes) |
```

| [LokiMemoryHighWarning](#LokiMemoryHighWarning) | Loki System | Warning | Loki's memory usage is high (above 75% of the configured limit for 5 minutes) |

> | [LokiMemoryHighError](#LokiMemoryHighError) | Loki System | Critical | Loki's memory usage is high (above 95% of the configured limit for 5 minutes) |

Reviewer: Same comment, both can be LokiMemoryHigh. In general, don't suffix alert names with a severity like "FooWarning", the severity is delivered as part of the alert, it shouldn't be in the name.

Author: Great feedback. thanks
